---

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 License

---

# Analyze Options for ASL BridgePoint
### xtUML Project Review Minutes

Reviewed:  https://github.com/cortlandstarrett/mc/blob/10414_wasl/doc/notes/10414_wasl/10414_wasl_ant.adoc
34cd2e7d8a49ef17217f5debd536910c4579c368
Present:  Cort,Keith,Bob,Levi

<pre>

-- Num Type  Who  Section  Comment
x- 01  min   keith  all      Some comments were added directly to github
o- 02  min   keith  several      document sub-section numbers is not consistent. some do have higher-level prefix, some not.
Over time, we will find a better way in asciidoc and perhaps with markdown.
x- 03  min   keith  3(and other)       we sort-of miss the square brackets in referencing
These are a bit inconsistent in asciidoc on this particular document element.
So, I am adding them manually.
x- 04  min   bob  requirements      Add the requirement ID to the short descriptions in the requirement section to consistently link this doc to the SRS requirements.
x- 05  min   bob  5.1      Move this sentence about conclusion to the conclusion section
x- 06  min   keith  5.1      Add blank row between dialect sections
x- 07  min   bob  5.1      Highlight "challenges", it is like threats from the SWOT, but "challenges" should be called out
x- 08  min   bob  5.1      alf is missing learning curve
x- 09  maj   bob  5.1      rethink opportunities/threats.
x- 10  min   bob  5.2      ROM effort is in man-weeks. This should be specified
x- 11  min   cort  5.2      Call out that no prototype has been done
x- 12  min   cort  5.3      move table to end
x- 13  min   levi  5.4      there are things that dont exist in masl that do in smasl. The definition of smasl needs to be updated.
This was updated in 10440_wasl_proto_dnt.adoc in a separate branch.
x- 14  min   bob  5.4.table     "convert Relationship and Event" ->  "Convert the Relationship and Event models"
x- 15  min   cort  5.4      remove the recommendation (it is covered in the conclusion)
x- 16  min   bob  5.5      same as observation #14 (make it clear these are model names)
x- 17  min   keith  5.7      "both direction" -> "both directions"
x- 18  min   keith  5.7.1       typo - the word testing is repeated
x- 19  min   keith  5.8      A user can work from the command line if they choose
x- 20  min   cort  5.9      Move the "last paragraph" to the conclusion section
_- 21  maj   bob  6      re-review recommendation section after formatting. It does not flow well right now
x- 22  maj   Cort 6  6      Number 1 recommendation is to move to BP, and stay with ASL. The following steps will show recommended path to do that.
x- 23  min   levi  6.5/5.?      xtUML2WASL command-line is called out in a couple places, but WASL2xtUML command-line is not. This seems inconsistent.
x- 24  min   bob  6.9.4      typo (missing word)
o- 25  min   levi  6.9      have designated people be active in the xtuml community. Perhaps these people should even know how to build BP (so they are familiar with this open source product and process around it)


</pre>

Major observations were recorded, a re-review is required.


End
---
