---

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 License

---

# Add Graphics to Model
### xtUML Project Design Note


1. Abstract
-----------
Add graphics to a model with no graphics.

2. Document References
----------------------
<a id="2.1"></a>2.1 [BridgePoint DEI #8238](https://support.onefact.net/issues/8238) This issue.  
<a id="2.2"></a>2.2 [analysis note for #8238](https://github.com/xtuml/bridgepoint/bridgepoint-doc/notes/8238/8238_render_graphics.ant.md)  
<a id="2.3"></a>2.3 [cell phone photo of original `widget` model](https://github.com/xtuml/mc/doc/notes/8238/widget.jpg)  

3. Background
-------------
Work for [2.2] using the existing auto-reconciliation code has been
a challenge.  The more mechanical alternative described in the analysis
note is outlined here.

4. Requirements
---------------
(copied from [2.2] for easy reference)  
4.1 Create shapes in correct packages for all xtUML elements in a project.  
4.2 Created shapes shall be grid into a matrix with reasonable spacing.  
4.2.1 The grid shall be greater than 1 dimension (not just 1 row).  
4.3 Create connectors in the correct packages.  
4.3.1 Connectors shall be drawn between all participating widgets.  
4.3.2 Connectors with just one participating widget shall also be drawn.  

5. Analysis
-----------
5.1 Adding All Graphics  
Graphics reconciliation is a desired feature but is not required for
the present project.  Since all graphics need to be added to models,
the process can be simplified.

5.2 No Change to Existing BridgePoint  
Adding model graphics before Import means that no change is needed to
existing BridgePoint code.  This eliminates the exposure of breaking
existing functionality.  Also, considering the complexity and build times
of BridgePoint, this is an advantage.

5.3 Less Testing  
The change set for the alternative approach has grown large.
The data filter approach will be less code and will be outside
of BridgePoint proper.

6. Design
---------
6.1 Sibling Model to `docgen` (and `masl2xtuml`)  
`docgen` and `masl2xtuml` perform similar functions to what is
needed for graphics rendering.  The flow consists of loading an
xtUML model from its SQL data into the xtUML meta-model, selecting
and iterating over the instances of package, component, class,
state, association, transition, etc.  Instead of rendering XML
document data as in `docgen`, we will render SQL INSERT statements
for graphics diagrams of models.

6.1.1 Create `grafgen` Project  
Create a project as a sibling to `docgen` in the `mc` repository.
Enable IPR and provide visibility to `mcooa` and `mcshared`.

6.2 Model of Graphics  
BridgePoint already has a model of graphics.  However, it has more detail than
needed for this project.  For a single figure (class, component, state, etc.) or
coupler (association, transtion, etc.) in a model, a number of model elements
are persisted that coordinate to represent the figure or coupler drawn.  
There is no discussion or consideration in this document of components as
graphical containers.  
6.2.1 `diagram`  
diagram is a diagram.  It is a single drawing.  It is full of widgets.
It is the "root" of all visible elements.  
6.2.2 `widget`  
A widget is the supertype of figure and coupler.  Everything in the graphics
rendering has a location and takes space on the diagram.  
6.2.3 `figure`  
A figure is a shape.  But it is the `GD_SHP` element together with the `GD_GE`
and other stuff.  figure will care about what type of element is represented
and about linking to other figures through couplers.  Examples include
class, component, state, data type, external entity.  
6.2.4 `coupler`  
A coupler is some sort of thing that connects two or more widgets together.
Examples include transition, association, interface reference.  Couplers
link at least one widget, although a couple can be unlinked in some of the
informal diagram types.  
6.2.5 `junction`  
A junction is simply the location on a diagram where a coupler and another
widget touch and hold together.  

6.3 Templates  
Templates are created for a diagram and for each flavor of widget and coupler.
The approach to creating these templates can be mechanical.  For example,
to create the template for the _state_ figure:  
  - start BridgePoint with an empty state machine diagram.  
  - Save a copy of `InstanceStateMachine.xtuml`.  
  - Add a state.  
  - Diff the new and old InstanceStateMachine.xtuml files.  
  - The difference is the base for the state figure.  

6.4 `populate` method  
Each class in the model will have a populate class-based operation to create
and initialize an instance of the class.  

6.5 `render` method  
The render method will include the template for the type of widget being
emitted.  The template variables will be populated and the buffer filled.

6.6 OOA Navigation  
In general, the graphics will be rendered top down starting from the
system (`S_SYS`) and down to packages (`EP_PKG`) and down through components
(`C_C`) and into more packages.  Then, into classes (`O_OBJ`) and state
machines (`SM_SM`).  
For the purpose of early evaluation, state machines will be rendered
first.  They have a reasonably simple structure and offer a big return
on the investment.

Here are raw notes on overall traversal of the MM.
<pre>
Navigate from system to the root package.
Create a model root (GD_MD) 

select one ep_pkg related by s_sys->ep_pkg[main system package]
create GD_MD (with template)
select many ep_pkgs related by ep_pkg->EP_PKG[children]
for each ep_pkg in ep_pkgs
  select many c_cs related by ep_pkg->
  for each c_c
T   create GD_MD
T   add shape for C_C
    select many ep_pkgs related by c_c->EP_PKG
    for each ep_pkg
T     create GD_MD
T     add shape for EP_PKG
      select many o_objs related by ep_pkg->O_OBJ
      for each o_obj
T       add shape with X,Y and link to GD_MD and link to o_obj
        shift X, Y
        select one sm_ism related by o_obj->SM_SM->SM_ISM
        if ( not_empty sm_ism )
T         create GD_MD
          select many sm_states related by sm_sm->SM_STATE
          for each sm_state in sm_states
T           add shape with X,Y and link to GD_MD and link to sm_ism
            shift X, Y
        if ( not_empty sm_asm )
T         create GD_MD
          select many sm_states related by sm_sm->SM_STATE
          for each sm_state in sm_states
T           add shape with X,Y and link to GD_MD and link to sm_asm
            shift X, Y
      select many r_rels related by o_objs->R_OIR->R_REL
      for each r_rel in r_rels
T       add connector linked to anchor
T       add connector with X1,Y1 and X2,Y2 and link to GD_MD and link to sm_ism
</pre>

6.7 Layout  
Widgets cannot be placed on top of one another.  According to requirements
widgets must be neatly aligned in a grid fashion.  In most use cases,
the automatic layout will not be the final rendering of the diagram.
It is critical that the layout support easy rearranging of widgets on
the diagram.

A 2-dimensional matrix is needed.  The (x,y) coordinates of widgets will
drive this layout.  During design, appropriate coordinates will be identified
and either calculated during rendering or looked up in a table.

Options include using the number 8 as the number of figures in a row.
After 8 figures, a new row shifted down under the first row will begin.

6.8 Concerns  
To simplify the orientation of labels and decorations on couplers, it may
be desirable to capture the template data with extra bend points.  For
example, it may be smart to alway have a bend point for a transition
arrow a few units above the state figure, so that a fixed orientation
arrow head is on the end of the connector.

<pre>
Shapes are identical except for some sort of ID/index that likely chooses a widget graphic blob.

Shapes have an ID that links them to OOA.

Connectors are complex and seem to be associated with an anchor shape somehow.

A model compiler demo could be done inside BP using generator in the gen folder.


challenges:
- UUIDs (hmmm, maybe not)
  + generator will work in integer ID land
  + need to keep the UUIDs
  + New generator does not need the integer IDs.

I notice that DIM_CONs do not get deleted and cleaned up when state
transitions are deleted.  Junk accumulates.

The ID of the shape is a small integer number like 41 (state), 42 (transition),
49 (creation transition).
The IDs are connected to OOA at GD_GE.
Other IDs are interconnected within graphics and thus can be factoried
carefully.

Print the following onto paper.  Use colored pencils to high-light and label
the template variables.
- T snapshot empty state machine
- T snapshot 1 state
- T snapshot creation transition
- snapshot 2 state
- T snapshot transition between them
- factor out the state widget
- factor out the transition widget
- factor out the creation transition widget
- make templates of these with template variables:
  OOA ID, x0, y0, x1, y1, srcID, dstID
</pre>

7. Design Comments
------------------

8. Unit Test
------------
8.1 Render graphics for GPS Watch.  

End
---

