---

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 License

---

# Type name used as element name causes forward declaration of type
### xtUML Project Implementation Note


1. Abstract
-----------
Fix bugs in the masl round trip flow.

2. Document References
----------------------
[1] [9151](https://support.onefact.net/redmine/issues/9151) Type name used as element name causes forward declaration of type  
[2] [9145](https://support.onefact.net/redmine/issues/9145) Whitespace differences in MASL actions on round-trip tests  

3. Background
-------------
BridgePoint proper does not parse the internals of MASL User Data Type
definitions.  This leads to a challenge on the export with nested types.
Today we detect a nested type by searching for the type name anywhere in
the text of the body.  This gives false positives.

Differences in whitespace between an input MASL model and the output MASL
model import and export make it difficult to identify semantic changes.

4. Requirements
---------------
4.1 Eliminate or at least reduce the number of false positives for forward
references of user data types.

4.2 Reduce diff differences due to leading and trailing blanks.

5. Work Required
----------------
5.1 `type::render`  
5.1.1 Add a semicolon (`;`) to the type name in the search string used to
scan the body of the data type definition.  
5.1.2 NOTE:  This is not a very good solution.  A (legal) blank space
between the nested type name and the delimiting semicolon would cause
`masl` to miss the nested type and fail to provide the needed forward
reference.

5.2 `masldiff`  
Add `sed` in a pipe for the single file output.  Add `sed -i` with `find`
to process all of the files in a directory.

6. Implementation Comments
--------------------------
6.1 I changed `masl_round_trip` to keep the left and right diff files.

7. Unit Test
------------
7.1 `masl_round_trip`  
7.1.1 Run `masl_round_trip` on tests `9151_fref` and `9151_fref2`.  
7.1.2 See empty diff files in both cases.  

7.2 `masl_round_trip` regression  
7.2.1 Run `regression_test`.  
7.2.2 See empty diff files.  


8. Code Changes
---------------
<pre>

Fork: cortlandstarrett/mc  9151_forward_ref

xtuml/mc
 bin/masl_round_trip                              |  3 ---
 bin/masldiff                                     |  8 ++++++--
 doc/notes/9151_9145_int.md                       | 64 ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
 model/masl/models/masl/masltypes/type/type.xtuml |  6 +++++-
 4 files changed, 75 insertions(+), 6 deletions(-)

</pre>

End
---

