---

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 License

---

# MASL Flow Issues
### xtUML Project Implementation Note


1. Abstract
-----------

2. Document References
----------------------
[1] [9264](https://support.onefact.net/redmine/issues/9264) attribute named `current_state` is dropped  
[2] [8776](https://support.onefact.net/redmine/issues/8776) Detect and report empty role phrases.  
[3] [9089](https://support.onefact.net/redmine/issues/9089) Remove `instance<Object>` generic type from default MASL types  

3. Background
-------------
`current_state` is a special attribute that most of the time is supplied
by BridgePoint automatically when a class has a state machine.

4. Requirements
---------------
4.1 `current_state`  
4.1.1 Recognize when `current_state` is part of the imported application
and keep it around.  
4.1.2 Continue to omit the architectural `current_state` attribute on export.  

4.2 empty role phrases  
4.2.1 Output a message to the user when associations are missing role
phrases.  The console is sufficient.  

4.3 `instance<Object>`  
4.3.1 Stop supplying this default type.  

5. Work Required
----------------
5.1 `current_state`  
4.1.1 In the instance dumper, detect the type of `current_state` attributes
and dump accordingly.  This is done by assigning the architectural
`current_state` a type of `void`.  During instance dumping attributes with
name equal to `current_state` and type name equal to `void` get dumped
using the architectural type.  Otherwise, allow the user assigned type
to remain attached.

5.2 empty role phrases  
5.2.1 In the export routines for simple and associative relationships,
detect empty roles phrases and output tracing information.  Supply the
names of the classes involved.

5.3 `instance<Object>`  
5.3.1 Remove the line in `createSystem`.  

6. Implementation Comments
--------------------------

7. Unit Test
------------
7.1 `masl_round_trip`  
7.1.1 Run `masl_round_trip` on test `9264_current_state`.  
7.1.2 See empty diff.  

7.2 `MASL_template`  
7.2.1 Import the `MASL_template` project.  
7.2.2 Add the name attribute on `a_class` to the identifier.  
7.2.3 Add a new class (`c_class`).  
7.2.4 Relate new class to `a_class`.  
7.2.5 Formalize association.  
7.2.6 Export MASL Domain.  
7.2.7 See console failure message complaining about missing role phrases.  

7.3 `instance`  
7.3.1 Convert and import any MASL model.  
7.3.1 See that `instance` is not in the `types` package.  

7.4 `masl_round_trip` regression  
7.4.1 Run `regression_test`.  
7.4.2 See empty diff files.

8. Code Changes
---------------
<pre>

Fork: cortlandstarrett/mc  9264_current_state

xtuml/mc
 bin/m2x                                                           | Bin 692080 -> 692080 bytes
 bin/x2m                                                           | Bin 691496 -> 691376 bytes
 doc/notes/8507_deferral2_int.md                                   |  92 ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
 doc/notes/9264_8776_9256_int.md                                   |  90 +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
 model/maslin/gen/masl2xtuml_O_ATTR_class.c                        |   2 +-
 model/maslin/models/maslin/m2x/ooapopulation/ooapopulation.xtuml  |  51 ++++++++++++---------------
 model/maslout/gen/CSV_bridge.c                                    |   1 -
 model/maslout/gen/FILE_bridge.c                                   |  36 -------------------
 model/maslout/models/maslout/EEs/EEs.xtuml                        | 105 --------------------------------
 model/maslout/models/maslout/lib/xtuml2masl/maslout/maslout.xtuml |  13 +++++--
 model/maslout/models/maslout/maslout.xtuml                        |  24 -------------
 11 files changed, 215 insertions(+), 199 deletions(-)

</pre>

End
---

