---

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 License

---

# MC-3020 State Save  
### xtUML Project Implementation Note

### 1. Abstract

This note documents adding state save support to MC-3020.

### 2. Document References

<a id="2.1"></a>2.1 [10253](https://support.onefact.net/issues/10253) Add state-save to MC-3020.  
<a id="2.2"></a>2.2 [10273](https://support.onefact.net/issues/10273) Project Skyhigh  
<a id="2.3"></a>2.3 [Project Analysis Note](10247_mcenhance_ant.md) MC Enhancements for Time, Trace, State Save, Messaging  
<a id="2.4"></a>2.4 [Marking Implementation Note](10248_mcmark_int.md) MC Enhancements  
<a id="2.5"></a>2.5 [10306](https://support.onefact.net/issues/10306) Add class-based state machines to state-save.  

### 3. Background

See [[2.3]](2.3).

### 4. Requirements

Requirements from [[2.3]](#2.3) are repeated here for convenience.
(Numbering is preserved from the analysis note.)

4.2 State Save  
4.2.1 The state save API and functionality shall be supplied through a
modeled external entity (EE) which has bridges accessible at the model
level and from hand-written code.  
4.2.1.1 A bridge shall be supplied to trigger a state save to occur.  
4.2.1.2 A bridge shall be supplied to read state save data.  
4.2.2 A program separate from and codependent with the application
shall be used to convert state save data into a human readable form.  
4.2.2.1 The formatting program shall be generated together with the
application.  
4.2.2.3 The format of the human readable state data shall be comma separated
values with one element per line consisting of strings identifying the
element traced.  
4.2.3 State Save Data  
4.2.3.1 A state save contains encoded information representing the
`current_state` of each running state machine in the model.  
4.2.3.3 A state save contains encoded information representing the
sequences of events on the event queues excluding the parameters.  
4.2.4 A marking shall be supplied to enable and configure the state save
feature.  
4.2.4.1 The size of the buffer allocated for state save shall be configured
with marking.  

### 5. Work Required

5.1 Visibility  
Make event queues visible (`extern`) so state save code can "see" them.  

5.2 Metamodel Changes  
Add attribute `TE_C.class_strings`, `TE_SM.state_strings` and
`TE_SM.event_strings`.  These contain double-quote delimited lists of string
names of the elements.  R2100, R2101, R2102, R2103 and R2104 are added
to link the first and order instances of `TE_CLASS`, `TE_STATE` and `TE_EVT`.

5.3 Sort States and Events  
Create and sort states ane events once and remove bubble sorting.
Add a sorting routine to sort the states.  A reflexive may be necessary.
Add a sorting routine to sort the events.

5.4 Strings  
Lists of strings need to be generated into the `SS_bridge.h` file to be
used by the conversion utility which will format the state save buffer
into a comma separated list of human readable values.  The individual
lists of class names, state names and event names are built while the
class and state machine metamodel instances are initializating.  The
accumulated lists are built by iterating over components and classes
and emitting the lists of strings built during initialization.

5.5 Dump Instances  
MC-3020 already has a "domain class info" structure that connects each
component to the list of class instance extents defined within.  This
same structure is now navigated to extract the domain number, class
number, instance index and current state for all "active" classes (those
classes having an instance state machine).

5.6 Dump Event Queues  
MC-3020 maintains event queues in structure that can be used to facilitate
state save.  The queues are accessed when a state save is triggered.
Events are persisted as domain number, class number, instance index and
event number.  

5.7 File I/O  
5.7.1 Trigger Time  
The state save buffer is written to a file (name 'ssfile.4bytes' by default)
upon state save trigger (`SS::trigger()`).  
5.7.2 Convert/Display Time  
The state save file converter reads the state save file (from `stdin`) and
formats the data into a set of comma separater values in human readable
string form.

5.8 Converter Program  
A converter program is generated along with the state save buffer management
in the state save bridge source files (`SS_bridge.c` and ``SS_bridge.h`).
To compile the converter program, the `SS_bridge.c` files is compiled by itself
with a special compiler directive (-DESCHER_STATESAVE).

### 6. Implementation Comments

6.1 Current State Change  
The `current_state` of an instance was being changed after the activity
had been executed.  This is changed to be after the transition but before
the activity executes.  This will assure that the correct state is recorded
when a state save is triggered.

6.2 `rsl2oal` Pipe Bug  
`rsl2oal` conversion of RSL to OAL was not converting set union.  Any place
that the pipe (`|`) operator was used, the part of the expression starting
from the pipe was omitted from conversion.  This is now fixed in the `rsl2oal`
bison grammar.

6.3 Code Comments  
Action language statements get generated into the code by default.  There
is a mark to turn them off.  However, it was not working; `te_c.CodeComments`
was not being interrogated in the statement roll-up.

6.4 pyrsl bug  
There is a situation where .relate is adding a blank line to the
output buffer.  Here are some lines in `q.smt.generate.arc`  
<pre>
  .if ( te_select_related.by_where )
    .select one where_te_val related by act_sel->ACT_SRW[R664]->V_VAL[R611]->TE_VAL[R2040]
    .relate where_te_val to te_select_related across R2074
    .assign te_select_related.where_clause = where_te_val.buffer
    .assign te_select_related.where_clause_OAL = where_te_val.OAL
  .end if
  .relate te_select_related to te_smt across R2069
  .relate te_select_related to start_te_val across R2070
  .relate te_select_related to start_te_var across R2094
  .relate te_select_related to te_lnk across R2073
</pre>

The above `.relate` statements end up adding blanks to my output.  

The following new issue will track this:  [pyrsl 20](https://github.com/xtuml/pyrsl/issues/20).  

6.5 Class-Based State Machines  
Class-based state machines do not have an instance.  Therefore, when instances
are dumped, class-based state machines are not.  This is an opportunity for
future improvement.  Issue [[2.3]](2.3) tracks this.

6.6 Duplication of EE Includes  
In the `.c` files for bridges, EE include files and the primary system include
file were being `#include`d twice.

### 7. Unit Test

7.1 GPS Watch  
7.1.1 Import the OAL version of GPS Watch from Help->Welcome  
7.1.2 Navigate to GPS Watch -> SharedEEs and added 'Add Built-in External
Entities' from the context menu.  
7.1.3 Delete the duplicates with names ending in '-1'.  
7.1.4 Under the Tracking component, edit the WorkoutTimer 'paused' state
action.  Add the following _ahead_ of the noted existing line:  
```
// Get events on the event queues to make it interesting.
generate WorkoutTimer3:tick() to self;
generate WorkoutTimer3:tick() to self;
select one display related by self->WorkoutSession[R8]->Display[R7];
generate Display2:refresh() to display;
generate Display2:refresh() to display;
generate Display2:refresh() to display;
// Accumulate instances to enrich state save.
create object instance wot of WorkoutTimer;
create object instance wot of WorkoutTimer;
create object instance wot of WorkoutTimer;
create object instance wot of WorkoutTimer;

SS::trigger();

self.deactivate(); // <--- this line already present
```
7.1.5 Edit /gen/`system.mark` and add the following:  
```
.invoke MarkStateSave( 1000 )
```
7.1.6 Build the GPS Watch project  
7.1.7 See successful generation and compilation.  
7.1.8 Open a shell and navigate to the /src folder in the project.  
7.1.9 Compile the application C source code with `gcc -Wno-parentheses-equality *.c`  
7.1.10 From Debug Configurations, launch the 'GPS Watch UI' Java application.  
7.1.11 From the shell, run the compiled executable. (`./a.out`)  
7.1.12 On the UI, press the Start Stop Button to start the watch running.  
7.1.13 Allow a few (less than 10) track points to accumulate.  
7.1.14 On the UI, press the Start Stop Button to pause the watch.  
7.1.15 Exit the UI.  
7.1.16 Exit the application (ctrl-c).  
7.1.17 See a file created called `ssfile.4bytes`.  
7.1.18 Compile the converter with `gcc -DESCHER_STATESAVE SS_bridge.c -o ssconvert`.  
7.1.19 Run the converter like this:  
```
./ssconvert < ssfile.4bytes
```
add see output like this:  
```
9 instances, 2 self events, 3 instance events
component,class,instance,state
HeartRateMonitor,HeartRateMonitor,0,monitoring
Location,GPS,0,locating
Tracking,WorkoutTimer,4,stopped
Tracking,WorkoutTimer,3,stopped
Tracking,WorkoutTimer,2,stopped
Tracking,WorkoutTimer,1,stopped
Tracking,WorkoutTimer,0,paused
Tracking,Display,0,displayDistance
UI,UI,0,running
component,class,instance,event
self events
Tracking,WorkoutTimer,0,tick
Tracking,WorkoutTimer,0,tick
instance events
Tracking,Display,0,refresh
Tracking,Display,0,refresh
Tracking,Display,0,refresh
```

7.2 Documentation  
7.2.1 Navigate to Help -> Help Contents.  
7.2.2 In Help, navigate to Model Compiler User Guide -> Marking ->
System Level Marks -> Marking State Save  
7.2.3 See instruction for marking the buffer size.  

### 8. User Documentation

User documentation was updated for marking for this feature in [[2.4]](2.4).  

### 9. Code Changes

<pre>
Fork/Repository:  cortlandstarrett/mc
Branch:  10253_ss

 arc/c/q.components.arc                                                             |   2 +-
 arc/c/sys.arc                                                                      |   6 +-
 arc/q.classes.arc                                                                  |   6 +-
 arc/q.domain.bridge.arc                                                            |  29 --
 arc/q.domain.bridges.arc                                                           |   3 +-
 arc/q.domain.classes.arc                                                           |   6 +-
 arc/q.domain.limits.arc                                                            |  67 ++++-
 arc/q.main.arc                                                                     |  11 +-
 arc/q.sys.populate.arc                                                             |  39 ++-
 arc/sys_util.arc                                                                   |   3 +-
 arc/t.ee.brg.c                                                                     |   7 +
 arc/t.ee.c                                                                         |  31 +-
 arc/t.ee.h                                                                         |   5 +-
 arc/t.ee.ss.c                                                                      | 160 +++++++++++
 arc/t.ee.ss.main.c                                                                 |  52 ++++
 arc/t.ee.ss.strings.h                                                              | 115 ++++++++
 bin/mac/mcmc                                                                       | Bin 1579432 -> 1589232 bytes
 bin/mcmc                                                                           | Bin 2422504 -> 2427784 bytes
 bin/win/mcmc.exe                                                                   | Bin 1720625 -> 1728337 bytes
 doc/notes/10247_mcenhance/10253_ss_int.md                                          | 138 ++++++++-
 doc/notes/10247_mcenhance/ss.c                                                     |  87 +-----
 mcmc/arlan/funcsigs.h                                                              |  13 +-
 mcmc/arlan/o.oal                                                                   | 247 ++++++++++++----
 mcmc/arlan/o3.oal                                                                  |  11 +-
 model/escher/gen/ooaofooa.c                                                        | 571 ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++--------
 model/escher/gen/ooaofooa_c_orig                                                   | 575 ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++--------
 model/escher/models/escher/mcmc/afun/afun.xtuml                                    | 471 ++++++++++++++++++++++++++----
 model/escher/models/escher/mcmc/afunsmt/afunsmt.xtuml                              |  11 +-
 model/mcooa/gen/integrity.arc                                                      |  30 +-
 model/mcooa/gen/ooa.txt                                                            |  44 +--
 .../extensions/Translation Extensions/Extended Component/Extended Component.xtuml  | 127 ++++----
 .../Translation Extensions/Extended State Machine/Extended State Machine.xtuml     | 105 +++++++
 .../models/mcooa/extensions/Translation Extensions/Translation Extensions.xtuml    | 608 +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++------
 schema/sql/xtumlmc_schema.sql                                                      |  15 +-
 34 files changed, 2919 insertions(+), 676 deletions(-)
</pre>

### End
